Anna do booked on what to organize
religions do they group together they
form institutions and that has all sorts
of advantages
first of all scale might the Catholic
Church pulled in 97 billion dollars last
year according to The Wall Street
Journal now
religions have a much saner attitude to
art they have no trouble telling us what
art is about essentially it's propaganda
Rembrandt is a propagandist in the in
the Christian view
now the word propaganda sets off alarm
bells we think of Hitler we think of
Stalin don't necessarily propaganda is a
manner of being didactic in honor of
something art should be one of the tools
by which we improve our society art
should be didactic if I was a museum
curator I would make a room for love a
room for generosity books alone books
written by lone individuals are not
going to change anything I received a
request from a longtime viewer that I
respond to the political philosophy of a
landable tone you've just heard an
uninterrupted but highly edited and
compressed form of his philosophy on
this topic and I just note I feel as if
I'm sort of kicking someone when they're
down because this is not really his area
of expertise this is definitely not his
area of greatest strength
thanks to Wikipedia I now know that he
first became famous and respected as an
author actually for his thoughts about
romance stating relations between the
sexes falling in and out of love I have
no reason to question his credentials
under the heading but it's remarkable
the extent to which I disagree with them
and the extent to which I really have
complete contempt for his expressed
views in this lecture that I think I
have compressed down to two minutes here
fairly effectively given the vague
resemblance it has at least to my own
thoughts in a video many of you will
have seen that's just titled on
community I have often argued on this
channel that there's an important role
for community building and institution
building
I'm normally saying it in reference to
veganism as a political movement but it
could apply just as easily
to the struggle we have as atheists or
as nihilus in trying to raise our
children with meaningful values and
meaningful rituals a meaningful life in
what sometimes seems like an intensely
meaningless and largely commercialized
world so a lance speaks very very
rapidly in that clip as you saw it's not
sped up that's the that's the space at
which he gave the lecture originally so
let's now go through it step by step
now religions have a much saner attitude
- art they have no trouble telling us
what art is about essentially it's
propaganda Rembrandt is a propagandist
in the in the Christian view now the
word propaganda sets off alarm bells we
think of Hitler we think of Stalin don't
necessarily propaganda is a manner of
being didactic in honor of something art
should be one of the tools by which we
improve our society art should be
didactic so you guys may have noticed at
the start of that clip that I point out
to you that he's reached an audience of
three quarters of a million viewers just
with that one version of the video on
one YouTube channel I don't know how
many other broadcast media are used for
this however you might also notice that
it's just coming up now - its seven-year
anniversary and I think it is worth
asking with any kind of political
manifesto of this kind to what extent in
seven years have any of these ideas been
put into practice to what extent have
they found currency - what a sense have
they proven to be applicable or
effective and would I be going too far
if I said not at all that these have
been in a seven-year retrospect this
program of action is laying out is a
complete failure including even the
position he takes here on art art as
propaganda and this might be the easiest
to implement part of his vision major
Hollywood movies now and yeah I did look
this up for me in the video major
Hollywood movies cost about two hundred
and fifty million US dollars to make
it's easy to say as he does in his
rousing conclusion here
art should be didactic well there's a
real hierarchy of power involved in who
would make the decision about what is
going to be taught what lessons are
going to be set down who is so to speak
going to write the script and then who
is going to furnish the 250 million
dollars to deliver that message we see
year after year now artistic projects
that may start off with various
pretensions of making the world a better
place but in the end are scrambling
trying to just not drive their own
studio to bankruptcy it is a very very
difficult struggle to make a movie about
a man in skin tight clothing who's been
bitten by a radioactive spider earn the
five hundred million dollars or more
that it needs just to break even
so it's interesting to me that this
argument as simple as it as it may seem
can simply be refuted but pointing to
the economic reality of what propaganda
is what propaganda always must be and
why there is a profound difference
between propaganda and art if the
government of China which is still to
this day a communist country paid two
hundred and fifty million dollars to
make a film carrying its didactic
message as he says do you think that
film would earn back the two hundred and
fifty million dollars in profits from
audiences here in Canada the United
States Western Europe from audiences
paying to see it this is sadly or
strangely not a hypothetical question
one of the last really large-scale large
budget attempts at propaganda filmmaking
from China was a major film about lei
Fong I'll tell you a little bit who that
is
the young life on the early life of lei
Fung a National communist hero whose
whole life by the way is fiction he
originated as a propaganda figure I
think he's a propaganda figure still and
despite the government putting in a huge
budget of course it was all done a
non-profit basis it was such a flop it
was so on
successful that in some cinemas nobody
bought even a single ticket and local
governments respond to this challenge in
different ways apparently in some
counties or some areas the government in
order to cover up a sense of
embarrassment cancel the screenings
entirely took the film out of cinemas so
that wouldn't have the embarrassment of
looking at empty seats and in other
counties reportedly they tried to round
people up and force them to go and watch
the film so yeah there are some basic
ideas here about what is art what is
propaganda the economic and political
basis for why propaganda is so
profoundly different from art that a
landable tone seems to have gotten to
his middle-age years without ever
seriously questioning or thinking about
and to say this is a one-sided a
rose-colored glasses view of propaganda
is an understatement I did laugh out
loud just now listening back to the tape
at the moment when he says well the word
propaganda might remind you of the Nazis
or Joseph Stalin says don't just don't
don't think about that the word
propaganda sets off alarm bells we think
of Hitler we think of Stalin don't
propaganda is something paid for period
that that's absolutely part of the
definition and it is true that it is not
always governments who pay for
propaganda it is true that we can all
donate money to a cause like Mothers
Against Drunk Driving and independent
charities especially when they have a
clear singular purpose may take on
propagandistic art projects filmmaking
or what-have-you but point to is that
propaganda is normally something the
audience will see unwillingly or
involuntarily even if that's as simple
as Mothers Against Drunk Driving paying
to put up a video playing in a public
place as an advertisement or a poster I
remember they used to be all the time in
the buses when you were riding the bus
there'd be post there'd be posters
advertisements in the bus that's paid
for and you didn't choose to see it I do
not remember my
against drunk driving ever putting
together 250 million dollars to make a
mainstream Hollywood movie and then
trying to earn a profit on how to no
dramatizing the misery of people dying
in in drunk driving accidents now I want
to move past very quickly here the
abstract general question of who would
pay for this so who would pay for this
new school of art and propaganda
Steinbach I want to ask you directly you
the viewer or you Alain de Botton
if you see this would you would you pay
the money for this this comes back to
one of the great fundamental differences
between faith and faithlessness it's
very easy to get people to contribute
money to a presumed good cause on the
basis of faith and people become
remarkably skeptical about donating
their money when they're making
decisions on the basis of something
other than faith when people actually
believe that they're donating money to
save their soul to buy their way into
the eternal kingdom of heaven or to
defeat some great and supernatural evil
it's remarkable how uncritical they are
about donating money and not really
caring about where it goes and what
happens to it by contrast we really do
have major campaigns in veganism
veganism as an ethical cause as an
ethnological cause even as a
health-based cause we do have propaganda
campaigns that are based on people
donating their money to create those
works of propaganda and then to somehow
advertise them or expose them to an
audience or what-have-you and to say
people are skeptical about donating
their money is an understatement I think
one of the questions people ask whenever
they drive past a giant billboard
telling you not to drink cow milk
because think about the suffering of the
cows people driving their cars say who
would pay for that who indeed would you
and all the time I talk to my friends my
friends and colleagues in the vegan
movement and they tell me that they are
donating money to somebody like Joey
carbs strong or someone like earthling
ed or a direct action everywhere
led by twaimz young I have varying
degrees of misgiving about the other
leaders who are out there in veganism
but the level of skepticism the level of
scrutiny we don't believe in these
people in a very real sense which I'm
but on level of faith we don't believe
in this cause so the questions about
donating money to support propaganda or
to support art with this conception of a
didactic propagandistic role for art in
our society the very simple question of
who would pay for it and would you and
then what are you gonna do if nobody
shows up in the cinema what are you
gonna do if the movie bombs are you
gonna have the soldiers so you can have
the army force people to watch the movie
at gunpoint
are you gonna force it down people's
throat by making it the only thing on TV
like North Korea I'm sorry these are
maybe dark and extreme questions but at
the opposite extreme would you be happy
raising two hundred and fifty million
dollars and nobody sees the film your
money just goes down the drain it's a
flop and how many times is that going to
go on how could that ever possibly have
the durability and influence that he's
looking for he wants a theist
institutions to resemble the Catholic
Church
well I'm sorry in the absence of faith
it could never possibly be that durable
because what you're describing here
implicitly
is madness
[Music]